Total Hours: 70 Hrs

Module 1 (10 (T) + 7(P) Hours)
Computer abstraction and technology: basic principles, hardware components, Measuring
performance: evaluating, comparing and summarizing performance.
Instructions: operations and operands of the computer hardware, representing instructions, making
decision, supporting procedures, character manipulation, styles of addressing, starting a program.

Module 2 (10 (T) + 7(P) Hours)
Computer arithmetic: signed and unsigned numbers, addition and subtraction, logical operations,
constructing an ALU, multiplication and division, floating point representation and arithmetic,
Parallelism and computer arithmetic.

Module 3 (10 (T) + 7(P) Hours)
The processor: building a data path, simple and multicycle implementations, microprogramming,
exceptions, Pipelining, pipeline data path and Control , hazards in pipelined processors

Module 4 (12 (T) + 7(P) Hours)
Memory hierarchy: caches, cache performance, virtual memory, common framework for memory
hierarchies
Input/output: I/O performance measures, types and characteristics of I/O devices, buses, interfaces in
I/O devices, design of an I/O system, parallelism and I/O.


References:
1. D. A. Pattersen and J. L. Hennesy, Computer Organisation and Design: The Hardware/ Software Interface, 4/e, Morgan
Kaufman, 2009.
2. V. P. Heuring and H. F. Jordan, Computer System Design and Architecture, Prentice Hall, 2003.

CS2004 COMPUTER ORGANIZATION
Pre-requisite: Nil CORE
L T P C
3 0 2 4
Course Outcomes:
1. Engineering knowledge :Students will learn how to design a modern processor and how to
measure the performance of a processor. Students will be able to classify the processor architecture
of different company processors.
2. Problem analysis : Students will be able to design an efficient processor and memory hierarchy
employing hardware or software technology.
3. Design/development of solutions : Learning this course will enhance the student’s ability to
modify the processor design to achieve maximum performance based on other components in the
system. Students will be able to write assembly language programs and run their program using
MIPS simulator.
4. Conduct investigations of complex problems : There will be event to
 demonstrate programming proficiency using the various addressing modes and data transfer
instructions of the target computer
 develop the ability and confidence to use the fundamentals of computer organization as a tool
in the engineering of digital systems
5. Modern tool usage : Students will be familiar with NASM assembler, which is used for
programming in Assembly Level Language that helps to deal with computer hardware.
6. The engineer and society : Students can create awareness programme on software and hardware
components and its scope in research fields considering “ in 2025” everything will be automated.
7. Ethics : Students are strongly motivated to pursue good conduct and eradicating dishonesty,
finding short-cut etc., to achieve in their profession. However, they are highly trained towards “if
not able to trace, make an impact”
8. Life-long learning
This course will give a clear view of the processor architecture and related issues. The course impart
a motivation to pursue research in the area of processor architecture.
